good afternoon the corona virus pandemic
continues to grow very sadly overnight
87 more people have died bringing the
total to 422 and our hearts go out to
their families and their friends
yesterday the Prime Minister announced
the most radical steps yet to slow the
spread of this virus and these steps are
not requests they are rules you should
stay at home except to shop for food for
medical reasons for exercise or for work
including caring and volunteering in the
coronavirus national effort we
understand how significant these steps
are we ask for your forbearance but I
think that the public knows that this is
important and they know how vital a task
it is that we get a grip on the spread
of this virus and slow it down the more
we follow the rules
the sooner we will stop the spread and
so everybody has a responsibility to
follow those rules and where possible to
stay at home I know how worried people
are and while this is a great time of
turbulence it is a moment to that the
country can come together in that
national effort as the next step in that
effort today we launch NHS volunteers
we're seeking a quarter of a million
volunteers people in good health to help
the NHS for shopping and for delivery of
medicines and to support those who are
shielded to protect their own health the
NHS volunteer responders is a new scheme
set up so that people can come and help
and to make sure that the NHS
and the local services that are needed
get all the support that they can I can
also announce that the call we made at
the weekend for people to return to the
NHS has been incredibly successful so
far so far 11788 people have answered
that call 2660 doctors over two and a
half thousand other health professionals
and pharmacists and 6147 nurses and i
pay tribute to each and every one of
those who's returning to the NHS at its
hour of need in addition from next week
5500 finally our medics and 18,700 final
year student nurses will move to the
front line to make sure we have the
people we need in our NHS to respond to
this crisis in total that's over thirty
five thousand more staff coming to the
NHS when the country needs the NHS most
finally I can announce today that we
will next week
open a new hospital a temporary hospital
the NHS Nightingale hospital at the
Excel Centre in London the NHS
Nightingale hospital will comprise two
wards each of two thousand people with
the help of the military and with NHS
clinicians we will make sure that we
have the capacity that we need so that
everyone can get the support they need
but no matter how big we grow the NHS
unless we slow the spread of this virus
then as we've seen those numbers will
continue to rise and that's why it's so
important that everybody follows the
advice and stays at home the final point
I want to make is one of thanks
as health secretary and as a citizen and
on behalf of the whole country I want to
thank the staff of the IHS those who
work in social care all of you not just
the doctors and nurses who normally get
mentioned but the pharmacists the
paramedics the managers and all staff
across the board you are the frontline
in this war against this virus and we
all pay tribute to you you're going to
give you all over the next few weeks and
I want you to know that we salute you
and I will strain every sinew to get you
everything you need to keep you safe so
that you can do your job keeping all of
us safe we're now going to go to
questions the first question is from
Laura Coombs Berg BBC stay thirsty and
we've heard from many members of the
public today who are being told that
they should go to work by their boss
though they don't think their work is
essential right now at this moment and
they don't feel they can stay safely two
metres apart from everyone else there
the message to many people has not been
that clear from the government who are
they meant to listen to their boss or
the advice from the government and can I
ask that question to the medics in a
different way if people feel they're not
safe at work what should they do should
they stay at home well I'll give the
first part of the answer and then yeah
I'll hand over to Jenny as deputy chief
medical officer to give the medical view
the advice is crystal clear which is you
should stay at home unless you have one
of the four reasons which is exercise
shopping as little as you have to for
medical reasons or to go to work where
that work can't be done at home and if
you're a key worker for instance if you
work in the NHS and social care then you
should go to work because that work is
vital in the effort to tackle
coronavirus Jenny
and Thank You Lora I think the important
thing with all of these questions is to
take us right back to the first
principles of why we have asked for
these interventions it is to prevent
transmission of disease and the rule
about the two meters is to ensure that
we are consciously keeping apart from
each other so we do not inadvertently
pass on disease if we have it so I think
when you're talking about work
environments exactly as the Secretary of
State has said there are numerous
occupations where you do not need to be
at work it's some of them we have to and
we recognize the support of our key
workers as secretary stated in providing
that service but many don't don't need
to be and I think we are encouraging our
employers to think really carefully
about how they can innovate in the way
they star for working and if they do
need to be in the office just to spread
people around I know for example for for
a few of us who are having to be in
environment so actually there's an awful
lot of space created so you can practice
safe distancing at work I think it's
it's a common-sense principle and we all
need to apply it both employers and
employees
and it'd be men sensible that people who
want to stay at home can't and risk the
sack if they do defy their employers
instructions and a question to the
deputy chief medical officer just a
practical one imagine you've got a two
year old who is ill and both parents or
the only parent sorry a two year old who
is healthy and both parents or an only
parent gets ill what is meant to happen
to that child
essentially the questions - on which
people want to hear the medical advice
I'll ask Jenny - to answer but we have
been incredibly clear about the rules
and one of the reasons that we
strengthened the rules yesterday and
essentially flipped the basis of the
rules so it's not do whatever you like
so long as you don't do the following it
is stay at home unless you've got a good
reason and we will also enforce against
those rules but I'll ask Jenny to answer
the point on on people who are asked to
go to work
of course if you're in a workplace that
we have said will close and then we're
going to enforce against those against
those closures as well Jenny so the same
principles apply I think obviously if
people don't feel safe in their work
environment they should always raise
those concerns and I think by far the
majority of employers are being really
sensible and supportive and there's been
huge support for for staff and to the
population in general but for some
environment so I'm the obvious one is
our health care environment we are
ensuring that staff understand what the
the risks of working are and and how
we're supporting them to do to do their
work safely I think you raised an issue
particularly about specific advice we
cannot individually cover every single
scenario whether it be in the workplace
or whether it be in the family so again
it's back to applying the principles if
individuals can work safety they can
keep a distance apart
and they also think the other things
important to remember the fundamentals
of our early campaign which is around
hand-washing maintaining that frequently
so if there are facilities there to do
that they should be using them if they
don't feel that safety then I think it's
reasonable to highlight that very firmly
with their employer
you raised a particular issue about a
young child and clearly all the way
through this we have been very careful
to ensure that as individuals steps in
increasing steps are put in place to try
and manage this outbreak that we manage
both the the impact on the disease
itself but also recognizing that there
are other risks either in putting in
interventions too quickly or not
thinking through some of the parameters
about how we handle some of these issues
the obvious ones yesterday were around
the elderly particular vulnerabilities
and a small child clearly is a
vulnerable individual so in this case
although we are encouraging everybody to
stay in their own households that's the
unit with the the same risk exposure
clearly if you have adults who are
unable to look after a small child that
is an exceptional circumstance and if
the individuals do not have access to
care support formal care support or to
family they will be able to work through
their local authority hubs okay next
question got Tom Newton done at the Sun
thank you very much
sector so question to you and then once
the deputy CMO if I can why are you so
adamant that non key workers must go to
work as much as possible if they can't
work at home in the fields of
manufacturing construction is it because
you share Donald Trump's concerns that
the cure can be more dangerous than the
problem the sentiment expressed this
morning and deputy CMO could you
possibly clear a lot of questions up
coming from boyfriends and girlfriends
who aren't cohabiting are they allowed
to meet in public places because you
haven't banned meetings of two people
and when they do meet are they allowed
to be affectionate I allowed to meet
each other's houses well I'll take the
first now definitely
the second two to Jenny and the the
absence of the first is that the
judgment that we have made is that in
work in many many instances the 2-meter
rule can be applied in my workplace in
the House of Commons you can see it
every day and where possible people
should work from home and employers have
a duty to ensure that people are more
than two metres apart because as Jenny
says it's about going back to the
principles of what we're trying to
achieve which is to keep people apart so
that we slow the spread and the more
people follow the rules
the faster we will all get through this
thank you so I'm clearly going to start
a new career here in relationship
counseling so I will tread very
carefully as I work through this answer
and the principle is that we want people
to stay in their household units
primarily the reason for that is because
if you have an infection you are very
close with your family members so your
risk of exposure to the virus is pretty
similar usually across a family we
almost expect another member of the
family to get that unless they are
applying very very stringent precautions
so if your two individuals two halves of
the couple are currently in separate
households ideally they should stay in
those households the alternative might
be that for quite a significant period
going forward that they should just test
the strengths of their relationship and
decide whether one wishes to be
permanently resident in another
household in which case all of the
decisions about exercising if you are in
you should be on your own or with in
your household unit would apply so again
the issue here is what we do not want is
people switching in and out of
households it defeats the at the purpose
of the reduction in social interactions
and will allow transmission of disease
so perhaps tests test really carefully
your strengths of feeling stay with the
household either together or apart but
keep it that way
we go forward because otherwise we will
not all be working towards achieving our
outcome there you go make your choice
and stick with it very good is anything
you want to do out on that single
journey gave a perfect answer now if I
go to pull war from the HuffPost
poor Secretary of State can you explain
to NHS staff who had to travel on
crammed and overcrowded tube trains this
morning just why private house building
and office building is deemed essential
work
are you considering restricting
construction work to just those projects
where health and safety is needed and
not to be too cynical about it does the
fact that housing developers contributed
more than a million pounds to the Tory
party general election campaign have
anything to do with a different view
taken in England as opposed to Scotland
were the first minister has said that
building site work should be restricted
and stopped immediately and can I ask
the to the medics can ask professor
Powis in the United States President
Trump has talked about using
over-the-counter anti-malarial drugs to
beat coronavirus the UK has imposed an
export ban on chloroquine last month was
that because we're looking at similar
treatments here and what and what advice
have you got in terms of those trials
being done here all the decisions that
we're taking Paul are taken in the
national interest this is a largely
cross-party effort we're making
judgments difficult and big judgments
every day about how best to tackle this
virus and that is the only thing that
matters and how we minimize the overall
number of deaths from the virus and get
the spread down so that we can so that
we can get through this as fast as we
can and that's the only thing that we
consider based on the science and the
medical advice of course and when it
comes to the tube the first at the best
answer is that Transport for London
should have the tube running in full so
that the people traveling on the tube
are and are spaced out and can be
further apart obeying the 2-meter rule
wherever possible and there is there's
no good reason in the information that
I've seen that the current levels of
tube troop provision should be as low as
they are we should have more tube trains
running when it comes to construction
and there's there's many countries that
have made the same judgment that it's
that you can construction can carry on
with people two meters apart from each
other and of course people need to get
to work
but the best way to do that is two
meters apart from others with more tube
trains running when it comes to NHS
staff there's another reason why we need
tube services up and running preferably
in full so that we can get NHS staff to
their posts and doing the work that
they're doing and should I hand over
Steve on the medical question estates so
thank you Paul so as you know this is a
new virus and so we do not have a tried
and tested specific drug treatment that
can act against the virus but there are
a number of drugs where there is a lot
of interest that they may potentially
have an effect in the treatment of the
virus and the ones that you mentioned
which are chloroquine and
hydroxychloroquine those are drugs that
as you say have been used in malaria are
on that list so there is a lot of
interest both internationally and also
in the UK to learn how those drugs might
be used here in the UK we want to do as
much as we possibly can within the
context of clinical trials we have
excellent networks already set up to be
able to do clinical trials and it's
important that we do that - absolutely
learn where the drugs potentially work
and where they don't and I'm really
delighted that we have already recruited
the first person in the UK into one of
those clinical trials so yes this is an
area of intense interest we will of
course be working with our colleagues
around the world as they look at these
drugs but in the UK we will also be
looking at drugs such as this so that we
can see whether there is a specific
treatment that we can use okay great
thank you
for final question from from Heather
sure at the Guardian sex you say can I
ask about testing yeah
millions of tests that are going to come
in the days and weeks ahead is that the
advancing body test that you've talked
about and if so how soon might those
availabe available and and can you use
them to test the nature staff so that
they can go back to go back to work yeah
if they've had the virus and can I just
ask the more overarching question and
you talked about that sharp increase in
the death toll is it possible or even
probable that some of those deaths might
have been avoided how do we implement it
very stringent avoiding lockdown sooner
do you have any qualms about that at all
thank you thank you have I answer and
then I'll also ask Jenny to go into more
into more detail and I understand why
NHS staff in particular and others
across public service are so keen to get
the testing ramped up that we need to
see and the we're undertaking of course
it really matters for getting people
back to work so we've now bought three
and a half million antibody tests that
will allow people to see whether they
have had the virus and are immune to it
and then can get back to work and you
might have seen in the in the Commons
earlier I was sat next to Nadine Doris
because she now has had a corona virus
and she can and she is for the time
being immune to it because we expect the
people not to be able to catch it except
in very exceptional circumstances for a
second time the so on testing we are
ramping up that will come those will
come online very soon in fact our new
testing facility in Milton Keynes opens
today and we therefore are on the ramp
up of the testing numbers and the the
the other thing I want to mention in
that space is of course many many people
across the NHS are asking for more
protective equipment personal protective
equipment and I can tell you that over
the last 24 hours
we have shipped seven a half million
pieces of protective equipment
especially the masks the so called FFP
three masks which are very important to
get out and with there's now a a hotline
so that if you are in there in the NHS
or social care including and pharmacy if
you call the hotline if you don't have
the PPE that you need then we will get
it to you that's literally a military
effort to get these millions of pieces
of kit out to people if people are
working on the frontline to look after
us it's vital that we look after them
Jenny yes so it's just going to add a
little bit more on the the testing and I
don't know if Stephen wants to as well
so the testing that secretary States
described will also in due course give
us a real insight into the population
demographics of testing so we will be
able to learn far more about how the
disease has spread across the population
and that might be one of the tools that
we have when we get towards the end of
the epidemic in the UK as well we'll be
able to understand much more about how
it transmits and therefore be able to
close it down more tightly the the other
testing of course is the sort of the
here-and-now
testing and we're also working really
hard to ramp that up because partly in
the NHS but separately as well and I
think this goes back to the point about
nurses medics our care staff knowing
when they do or do not have the illness
so that they can actually take their
families or themselves out of isolation
safely and be on the frontline we're not
there at the moment but we have that
very much coming through and a lot of
activity on it and I think that's that's
really important on the point of the
deaths I mean I think it's inevitable
any any death is a sad event and we
would all want to prevent those I think
it's really difficult if we start as
there is a tendency at the moment I
think to start comparing individual
countries what the death rate has been
how many deaths there have been and what
the impacts of various lockdowns have
been and I think the word lockdown as
I've mentioned previously is very
difficult because in effect what we have
done in the cont in this country is
systematically put in steps
using the science looking at the data to
have the greatest impact at the right
time and and that is the policy which we
are following now and obviously the
interventions which are changing the way
people live their lives that went in
yesterday are to continue to do that
it's not at all clear I think that in
many of the countries where they have
applied different lockdown principles
and obviously when we need to be really
clear what they are and when they were
put in Italy has had a lockdown for some
time and very sadly the death rate there
is is staggeringly high and so I think
we would have expected to some extent
this this number of deaths we're looking
very much as we go forward if everybody
does what we've asked them to do
yesterday which is stay at home whenever
they can look after our elderly we are
very much hoping that our death rates
will stay low and we will be able to
push the the epidemic forward and
flatter
testing testing is hugely important in
fighting coronavirus and as the
Secretary has said we have been ramping
up we're working with all the different
manufacturers who are beginning to
develop new tests and bring them to
market and as they ramp up we will ramp
up it's absolutely right that our sick
patients in hospitals should be tested
first but but after that we absolutely
need to be able to test our staff but
for a number of reasons one so if
they're isolating at home or with their
families and it turns out they don't
have coronavirus they can come back to
work and secondly because if we know
they've had it either through the test
that tells you you've had it immediately
or you've had it after a week or two the
serology tests you talked about then
they will no coming back to work that
they have immunity to the disease so we
are absolutely determined to ramp up
testing and to make it available to
staff and finally I think I'd echo what
Jenny said the NHS is pulling out all
the stops at present amazing staff doing
amazing things and I think as you've
heard from the secretary of state the
NHS Nightingale Hospital of the XL is
really an extraordinary
extraordinary feat I mean from a
standing start a day or two ago a
hospital will be built that will be able
to take its first patients at the start
of next week that's a remarkable
achievement and our staff working with
the military have been able to work on
so we're expanding capacity all the time
because we can see the additional cases
coming towards the NHS but it's
everybody's responsibility everybody's
responsibility as I said at the weekend
to take the action that we've asked them
to take to follow the instructions
because this is your chance to save
somebody else's life
this is absolutely your chance by doing
what we've asked you to do to ensure
that those deaths are as low as possible
and the NHS is put under as little
stress as possible well thank you that
ends the first first press conference
that we know of from Downing Street
thank you further questions thank you to
all the IT people who made sure that the
kit worked and in a way it demonstrates
that we can all be in different rooms we
could be more than two meters apart and
we can we can we can still answer the
questions that people have got so thank
you very much indeed
[Music]
you